scheme/including.md, before:

# Including Scheme in LilyPond

The first thing to understand is how - on a very basic level - Scheme code can
be used in LilyPond documents.  So this is what we will first investigate.

*Note: With LilyPond 2.19.22 some *substantial* simplifications have been
introduced in how Scheme can be integrated in LilyPond code.  In case of doubt
this book will strongly prefer the *new* syntax and exclusively explain this.*

## Switching Between LilyPond and Scheme

In order to insert code in a different language the parser must discern between
the two layers, which it does through the `#` sign that marks the transition
from LilyPond to Scheme.  Concretely, whenever the parser encounters this marker
it will interpret the *immediately following code* as a *Scheme expression*.

So to insert any Scheme expression into a LilyPond document you have to prepend
it with `#`.  The best way to understand this is to see it in action.  More or
less *any* LilyPond user will already have assigned a Scheme value to an
override:

{% lilypond %}
{
  \once \override DynamicText.extra-offset = #'(2 . 1)
}
{% endlilypond %}

The `#` tells LilyPond's parser to parse one complete Scheme expression, which
happens to be the *pair* `'(2 . 1)` (a later [chapter](data-types/index.html)
will go into more details about Scheme's data types.)

#### Exceptions

LilyPond very much “thinks” like Scheme, and all input will internally be
converted to Scheme.  Therefore some data types can be entered literally,
without explicitly switching to Scheme, and the following number assignments are
equivalent:

{% lilypond %}
{
  \once \override Stem.length = #7.5
  \once \override Stem.length = 7.5
}
{% endlilypond %}

This feels very natural, but it can cause some confusion once one starts
thinking about it.  The point is that it is actually the *LilyPond* parser that
performs this transparent conversion.

The same is true for strings *(TODO: should it be explained what a ”string”
is?)* that can additionally be written with or without double quotes (*NOTE:*
LilyPond/Scheme strings *have* to use *double* quotes, as single quotes have a
completely different meaning).  Again, the following assignments are equivalent:

{% lilypond %}
\header {
  title = #"MyPiece"
  title = "MyPiece"
  title = MyPiece
}
{% endlilypond %}

 The first one is the “regular” Scheme syntax: switching to Scheme mode, then
 writing a proper string with quotes.  The other ones are simplifications made
 possible through LilyPond's parser.  But in all three cases the variable
 `title` now refers to the *string* `MyPiece`. *Note:* the third version is only
 possible with single words. Something like `"My Piece"` *must* be enclosed in
 the quotes.

 There are a few other data types where this is possible, but we will discuss
 them at a later point.  For now you should only keep in mind that you have to
 use `#` to switch to Scheme syntax - but not *always*.

#### LilyPond and Scheme variables

Another thing to note is that LilyPond variables are interchangeable with Scheme
variables in LilyPond input files.  Variables can be defined using either
syntax:

{% lilypond %}
% define a variable using LilyPond syntax
bpmA = 60

% define a variable using Scheme syntax
#(define bpmB 72)
{% endlilypond %}

We have two variables, `bpmA` and `bpmB`, one of which has been entered as a
LilyPond, the other as a Scheme variable (as an exercise you can think about
this expression in the light of what you learnt in the previous chapter).  But
internally they are now the same kind of variable and can be accessed in the
same way:

{% lilypond %}
{
  % assign a tempo using a literal value
  \tempo 8 = 54
  R1

  % assign tempos using the variables with LilyPond syntax
  \tempo 8 = \bpmA
  R1

  \tempo 8 = \bpmB
  R1
}
{% endlilypond %}

However, as they are stored as Scheme variables internally we can also refer to
them using the Scheme syntax (i.e. switching to Scheme with `#` but *not*
enclosing them in parens, as these variables are constants or self-evaluating
expressions):

{% lilypond %}
{
   % assign tempos by referencing variables using Scheme
  \tempo 8 = #bpmA
  R1

  \tempo 8 = #bpmB
  R1
}
{% endlilypond %}

Each of these ways to access the variables will work interchangeably, and it
depends on the context which one should be used.  This flexibility may seem
confusing but it helps if you strictly remember that *all* values and variables
are maintained as Scheme structures internally and that setting and accessing
them can always be done through Scheme or LilyPond syntax.

<img src="http://lilypondblog.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/first-music-function1.png" alt="first-music-function-image" width="656" height="141" class="aligncenter size-full wp-image-2551" />

Commit message:

Add section about (display) to Integrating

scheme/including.md, after:

# Including Scheme in LilyPond

The first thing to understand is how - on a very basic level - Scheme code can
be used in LilyPond documents.  So this is what we will first investigate.

*Note: With LilyPond 2.19.22 some *substantial* simplifications have been
introduced in how Scheme can be integrated in LilyPond code.  In case of doubt
this book will strongly prefer the *new* syntax and exclusively explain this.*

## Switching Between LilyPond and Scheme

In order to insert code in a different language the parser must discern between
the two layers, which it does through the `#` sign that marks the transition
from LilyPond to Scheme.  Concretely, whenever the parser encounters this marker
it will interpret the *immediately following code* as a *Scheme expression*.

So to insert any Scheme expression into a LilyPond document you have to prepend
it with `#`.  The best way to understand this is to see it in action.  More or
less *any* LilyPond user will already have assigned a Scheme value to an
override:

{% lilypond %}
{
  \once \override DynamicText.extra-offset = #'(2 . 1)
}
{% endlilypond %}

The `#` tells LilyPond's parser to parse one complete Scheme expression, which
happens to be the *pair* `'(2 . 1)` (a later [chapter](data-types/index.html)
will go into more details about Scheme's data types.)

#### Exceptions

LilyPond very much “thinks” like Scheme, and all input will internally be
converted to Scheme.  Therefore some data types can be entered literally,
without explicitly switching to Scheme, and the following number assignments are
equivalent:

{% lilypond %}
{
  \once \override Stem.length = #7.5
  \once \override Stem.length = 7.5
}
{% endlilypond %}

This feels very natural, but it can cause some confusion once one starts
thinking about it.  The point is that it is actually the *LilyPond* parser that
performs this transparent conversion.

The same is true for strings *(TODO: should it be explained what a ”string”
is?)* that can additionally be written with or without double quotes (*NOTE:*
LilyPond/Scheme strings *have* to use *double* quotes, as single quotes have a
completely different meaning).  Again, the following assignments are equivalent:

{% lilypond %}
\header {
  title = #"MyPiece"
  title = "MyPiece"
  title = MyPiece
}
{% endlilypond %}

 The first one is the “regular” Scheme syntax: switching to Scheme mode, then
 writing a proper string with quotes.  The other ones are simplifications made
 possible through LilyPond's parser.  But in all three cases the variable
 `title` now refers to the *string* `MyPiece`. *Note:* the third version is only
 possible with single words. Something like `"My Piece"` *must* be enclosed in
 the quotes.

 There are a few other data types where this is possible, but we will discuss
 them at a later point.  For now you should only keep in mind that you have to
 use `#` to switch to Scheme syntax - but not *always*.

#### Displaying Scheme Values

Sometimes it is necessary, and for learning it is often enlightening, to print
some Scheme values to the console.  To start with, there are two ways to do so,
using Scheme's `display` procedure or LilyPond's `ly:message` family of
functions:

{% lilypond %}
myVariable = "This is a variable"

#(display myVariable)
#(ly:message myVariable)
{% endlilypond %}

There are some notable differences between the commands:

* `display` can show *any* value while `ly:message` only processes strings
  (but this can be circumvented using the `format` procedure)
* `display` will not produce a newline, so that should always be done manually
  (through `#(newline)`)
* `ly:message` will print immediately while `display` only acts after parsing
  has been finished.

We will regularly use these methods for demonstrating parts of our code in the
subsequent chapters.

#### LilyPond and Scheme variables

Another thing to note is that LilyPond variables are interchangeable with Scheme
variables in LilyPond input files.  Variables can be defined using either
syntax:

{% lilypond %}
% define a variable using LilyPond syntax
bpmA = 60

% define a variable using Scheme syntax
#(define bpmB 72)
{% endlilypond %}

We have two variables, `bpmA` and `bpmB`, one of which has been entered as a
LilyPond, the other as a Scheme variable (as an exercise you can think about
this expression in the light of what you learnt in the previous chapter).  But
internally they are now the same kind of variable and can be accessed in the
same way:

{% lilypond %}
{
  % assign a tempo using a literal value
  \tempo 8 = 54
  R1

  % assign tempos using the variables with LilyPond syntax
  \tempo 8 = \bpmA
  R1

  \tempo 8 = \bpmB
  R1
}
{% endlilypond %}

However, as they are stored as Scheme variables internally we can also refer to
them using the Scheme syntax (i.e. switching to Scheme with `#` but *not*
enclosing them in parens, as these variables are constants or self-evaluating
expressions):

{% lilypond %}
{
   % assign tempos by referencing variables using Scheme
  \tempo 8 = #bpmA
  R1

  \tempo 8 = #bpmB
  R1
}
{% endlilypond %}

Each of these ways to access the variables will work interchangeably, and it
depends on the context which one should be used.  This flexibility may seem
confusing but it helps if you strictly remember that *all* values and variables
are maintained as Scheme structures internally and that setting and accessing
them can always be done through Scheme or LilyPond syntax.

<img src="http://lilypondblog.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/first-music-function1.png" alt="first-music-function-image" width="656" height="141" class="aligncenter size-full wp-image-2551" />
