scheme/README.md, before:

# Scheme Fundamentals

This main bookpart covers the fundamentals of Scheme as used in LilyPond
documents.  However, while it *does* discuss the inclusion of Scheme code in
LilyPond documents its focus is the language aspect itself.  As a consequence
this bookpart won't discuss too many real-world uses in LilyPond, so if you are
strictly working through the book in order you might not find that part to be
real fun.  However, I think that it is crucial to have a firm understanding
about these fundamentals because it's exactly these that make learning Scheme so
(unnecessarily) confusing if not learned properly.

If it is an issue for you having to learn concepts without the opportunity to
apply them right away I have two alternative suggestions for you.  You may skip
this bookpart and head for the [Scheme in LilyPond](../lilypond/index.html) part
directly.  As the fundamental concepts won't be explained there again you will
need to jump back and forth to look up anything in the fundamentals part you
have difficulties with.  The potential gain is that you will only have to look
up what you really need, but on the other hand I think there's a pretty high
risk of neglecting the fundamental understanding that way.

As another “offer” this part of the book provides a [Music Function
Primer](music-function-primer.html), which gives you a few tools that you can
use as building blocks in LilyPond documents to try out the Scheme concepts in
actual score contexts.  The next bookpart will then provide in-depth discussion
about the interaction between LilyPond and Scheme.

Commit message:

Review Scheme bookpart introduction (and music function primer)

scheme/README.md, after:

# Scheme Fundamentals

This main part of the book  covers the fundamentals of Scheme as used in
LilyPond documents.  However, while it *does* give a basic explanation how
Scheme code is integrated in LilyPond documents its focus is the language
itself.  In particular it doesn't give many examples that would make much sense
in real-world documents, so if you work through the book in order you may find
that part not to be real fun.  However, I think that it is crucial to have a
firm understanding of these fundamentals because it's exactly these that make
using Scheme in LilyPond so (unnecessarily) confusing if not learned properly.

If it is an issue for you having to learn the concepts without the opportunity
to try them out right away I have two alternative suggestions for you.  You may
jump directly to the [Scheme in LilyPond](../lilypond/index.html) part.  But as
I won't explain the fundamental concepts there again you will need to jump back
and forth to look up anything you have difficulties with.  This way you will
only need to read through the explanations of what you really need, but on the
other hand you run the risk of neglecting some fundamental understanding.

As another “offer” this part of the book provides a [Music Function
Primer](music-function-primer.html), which gives you a few tools to use as
building blocks in LilyPond documents.  With these you can try out the Scheme
concepts in actual score contexts.  However, even if you intend to go that way I
strongly recommend reading the next two chapters before.
